\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename robotfindskitten.info
@settitle robotfindskitten
@finalout
@setchapternewpage odd
@dircategory Games
@c %**end of header


@ifinfo
This file documents the @code{robotfindskitten} Zen simulation.

Copyright (C) 1997, 1999, 2000 Leonard Richardson.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

@end ignore
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
by the Foundation.
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title robotfindskitten v1.7320508.406
@subtitle Leonard: In Bakersfield they have an art gallery in the mall.
@subtitle Al: That's where they belong.
@author by Leonard Richardson 
@email{leonardr@@segfault.org}
My site: @url{http://www.crummy.com/}
My software: @url{http://www.crummy.com/devel/}

============================================================================

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1997, 1999, 2000 Leonard Richardson.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
by the Foundation.
@end titlepage

@node Top, The Niceties, , (dir)

@ifinfo
This file documents the @code{robotfindskitten} Zen simulation.
@end ifinfo

@menu
* The Niceties::		Introduction and history.
* The Documentation::		Overview of robotfindskitten.
* A Word of Warning::		Helpful word of warning.
* Another Word of Warning::	Another helpful word of warning.
* Yet Another Word of Warning::
				They just keep coming.
* Technical Information for Hard-Core Geeks::		
				Hack Hack.
* Join the Bludgeoning robotfindskitten Community!::	
				Stand proud.
* A Final Thought::		Chapter and Verse.
* Index::			Contents of tables.
@end menu


@node The Niceties, The Documentation, Top, Top
@chapter The Niceties 

@cindex Nerth Pork
@cindex Peter Peterson II
@cindex Peterson, Pete
@cindex simulation, Zen
@cindex Zen simulation

Hi there. This is the documentation file for robotfindskitten, winner
(by default) of the first Nerth Pork webzine robotfindskitten
contest. The object of the contest was to create a work of art whose
title and/or theme was "robotfindskitten". I chose to write this
program, which is a Zen simulation. That's what Nerth Pork editor Pete
Peterson calls it, and that's really the best way to describe it, even
though "Zen simulation" sounds kinda pretentious.  Anyway, let's
dispense with the niceties and get on with the documentation.

@node The Documentation, The Parts of the Simulation, The Niceties, Top
@chapter The Documentation

@cindex robot
@cindex kitten
@cindex riboflavin
@cindex subversion
@cindex destiny
@cindex Nethack
@cindex EMACS

In this simulation, you play the part of robot. Your task is to
complete the simulation by finding kitten, as is your destiny, and
indeed your wont.  You (robot) are represented by the # character, and
you move around with the arrow keys (Nethack, EMACS, or otherwise) touching
things.  If the thing you touch is kitten, you get a cute little
animation (which was cuter in the DOS version) and the simulation
ends. Otherwise, you get a brief description of what it is you
touched. So far, there are 201 non-kitten objects in the simulation,
thus the subversion number 201. Future versions will have more objects
and thus higher subversion numbers.

@menu
* The Parts of the Simulation::		A rundown.
* Controls::				How to find kitten.
@end menu

@node The Parts of the Simulation, Controls, The Documentation, The Documentation
@section The Parts of the Simulation

@cindex non-kitten objects

The first part of the simulation is the command line used to invoke
it. It is here where you can control the number of non-kitten objects
on the screen in any one instance of the simulation. To exercise this
control, simply enter a number between 0 and 201 inclusive on the
command line. For instance, to play with 32 objects on the screen, you
would invoke the program with the command @command{robotfindskitten 32} (or,
more likely, @command{./robotfindskitten 32}). The default is twenty
non-kitten objects.

@cindex title screen
The second part of the simulation is the title screen. It should be
fairly self-explanatory.

The third part of the simulation is the actual simulation itself. The
long line near the top of the screen separates the screen into the
field of play and the status bar. The status bar displays messages and
item descriptions.  Just so you don't wonder what that line is.

The fourth part of the simulation... there isn't one. It's not a very
complicated simulation.

@node Controls, A Word of Warning, The Parts of the Simulation, The Documentation
@section Controls

@cindex movement
@cindex controls
@cindex Nethack
@cindex EMACS
@enumerate
@item
To move robot, use the arrow keys. Diagonals now work! Nethack arrow keys (including diagonals) now work! Now that's innovation! EMACS keys work, too.

@cindex touch
@item
To touch an object, make a move as if you were trying to occupy the square
currently occupied by the object you want to touch. Sorry if that seemed
obvious, but you never know. I don't want to be accused of writing incomplete
documentation.

@cindex ending the simulation prematurely
@item
If you want to end the program for whatever reason, just hit Escape, or
terminate the program by hitting control-C.
@end enumerate

@node A Word of Warning, Another Word of Warning, Controls, Top
@chapter A Word of Warning
@cindex Danger!
@cindex warning
Danger!

@node Another Word of Warning, Yet Another Word of Warning, A Word of Warning, Top
@chapter Another Word of Warning
@cindex consistency
@cindex spot kitten every time
@cindex warning
The characters you see on the screen are not guaranteed to correspond
in shape or color to what the descriptions say they are. In fact,
they're pretty much guaranteed not to. If there was any consistency,
it'd be pretty easy to spot kitten every time, now wouldn't it?

@node Yet Another Word of Warning, Technical Information for Hard-Core Geeks, Another Word of Warning, Top
@chapter Yet Another Word of Warning
@cindex beta
@cindex warning
@cindex weird things
This is a BETA release of robotfindskitten. I've never had it crash,
but it might do weird things. Let me know.

@node Technical Information for Hard-Core Geeks, Join the Bludgeoning robotfindskitten Community!, Yet Another Word of Warning, Top
@chapter Technical Information for Hard-Core Geeks
@cindex original version
@cindex DOS
@cindex Turbo C++ 3.0
@cindex Independence Day
@cindex ncurses 5.0
@cindex non-debian distribution of GNU/Linux
@cindex geek handshake
@cindex sheeplike masses
@cindex Borland
@cindex riboflavin
@cindex Bad People of the Future
@cindex Isn't it fun reading through the index?
The original robotfindskitten (the one that won the contest) was
written using Borland Turbo C++ 3.0 for DOS in 1997. I ported it to
(rewrote it for, more like) Linux over Independance Day, 1999. It now
uses the ncurses library. Version 1600003 is written for ncurses 5.0,
which is what I have on my Mandrake system. It's good that you're a
hard-core geek like me. I can speak frankly to you, knowing that
non-coders won't read this section, or will be scared off by all that
jargon in the first few sentences. Our plan is nearly complete, and we
are poised to take our rightful places as rulers of this
planet. Already we control the technology of the sheeplike masses. We
merely await the command from Geek Central, and Earth will be ours! AH
HA HA HA HA HA! Uh-oh, that evil laughing looks kind of conspicuous in
a doc file. I better put in some more technical info. If you want to
write your own ncurses game, you can use the framework provided by
robotfindskitten or the more flexible framework provided by the sequel
(also on my software page). Now, let us part with the secret geek
handshake!

@node Join the Bludgeoning robotfindskitten Community!, A Final Thought, Technical Information for Hard-Core Geeks, Top
@chapter Join the Bludgeoning robotfindskitten Community!
@cindex bludgeon
@cindex clue-by-four
@cindex community
@cindex hippy commune
@cindex Zen simulation
@cindex Peterson, Pete
@cindex Peter Peterson II
@cindex customized objects
@cindex contributing
I want robotfindskitten to be the most comprehensive Zen simulation on
the market. But for that to happen, I need your help. Please, send in
any descriptions of objects you would like to see in robotfindskitten
to @email{leonardr@@ucla.edu}. Heck, you could even tell me to put you in the
program!  I'm certainly not above that sort of thing. Pete Peterson
set a great example by providing over 30 objects for everone's
kitten-finding enjoyment. Also, be sure to tell me how you like
robotfindskitten.

@cindex bickering
@cindex sourceforge
In addition, as of November 2000, robotfindskitten has a project on
Sourceforge!  Simply visit @url{http://sourceforge.net/projects/rfk} and have a
look at our bug tracking system, bickering flame war mailing lists, and
haphazardly-branched CVS trees!

@node A Final Thought, Index, Join the Bludgeoning robotfindskitten Community!, Top
@appendix A Final Thought

@cindex abomination
@cindex soul
@cindex foolish NSF grants
@cindex your tax dollars at work
@quotation
Day and night I feverishly worked upon the machine, creating both a soul which
could desire its goal, and a body with which it could realize it. Many who saw
my creation called it an abomination, and denied me grant money. But they could
not dissuade me from my impossible task. It was a spectre that tormented me
always, a ghost I had to give a form and a life, lest it consume me from the
inside. And when at last my task was done, when the grey box on wheels was
complete and when it, as well as I, knew what had to be done, I felt deep
sympathy for the machine. For I had not destroyed the phantom, but merely
exorcized it into another body. The robot knew not why this task had to be
performed, for I could not imbue it with knowledge I did not myself posess. And
at the same time, I felt a sweeping sense of relief sweep over me, that
somehow, the dream that had driven me for my entire life had come one step
closer to fruition.

@cindex Gort, Klaatu Verada Nikto
As I vocally activated the robot, I realized that it was following my
instructions, but not out of any desire to obey me. Had I remained silent, it
would have performed exactly the same operations. We were two beings controlled
by the same force now. And yet, seeking vainly to hold some illusion of control
over the machine I thought I had created, I gave my final command.

@cindex find kitten
`GO!' I told the box as it began to roll out of my workshop into the frozen
desert beyond. `FIND KITTEN!'
@end quotation

@cindex Book of Found Kittens
       --The Book of Found Kittens, pages 43-4, author unknown


@node Index, , A Final Thought, Top
@unnumbered Concept Index

@printindex cp

@contents

@bye
